<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head><title>Chapter 3: The Finished Work of Christ</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/></head>
<body>
<p class="chapter-number">CHAPTER 3</p>
<p class="chapter-title">The Finished Work of Christ</p>
<p class="no-indent">Among the final words spoken by Jesus on the cross is a short phrase that has echoed throughout Christian history: “It is finished.” At first glance, these words might seem simple. They could easily</p>
<p>be understood as the final statement of someone whose life is coming to an end. But within the context of the Gospel story, this phrase carries a much deeper meaning. Jesus was not merely announcing that His suffering was over. He was declaring that the work He had come to accomplish had been completed. To understand why this statement matters so much, we need to consider how the earliest Christians understood the purpose of Christ’s life and death. For many people today, salvation is often framed primarily as forgiveness of sins. While forgiveness is certainly part of the Christian message, the New Testament actually describes the work of Christ in broader terms. Words like reconciliation, restoration, redemption, and new creation appear frequently throughout the writings of the apostles. These words suggest that something larger than individual forgiveness was taking place. The life, death, and resurrection of Jesus were understood as the moment when the relationship between God and humanity was fundamentally restored. The Apostle Paul writes about this in a powerful passage: &quot;God was in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not counting people’s sins against them.&quot; This statement reveals something important about the direction of the Gospel. God did not wait for humanity to reach Him. God moved toward humanity first. In the ancient world, reconciliation was a term used to describe the restoration of peace between two parties who had been separated or in conflict. When reconciliation occurred, the barrier between them was removed and relationship was restored. According to the New Testament, this is exactly what Christ accomplished. Through His life and sacrifice, the barrier that humanity believed stood between themselves and God was removed. This does not mean that human beings suddenly became perfect or that all moral struggle disappeared. Instead, it means that the foundation of the relationship between God and humanity changed. The distance that many people imagined separating them from God was no longer the defining reality. This realization has profound implications for how the Christian life is understood. If the work of reconciliation has already been accomplished through Christ, then the spiritual life cannot primarily be about trying to earn God’s acceptance. Instead, it becomes about learning to live within a relationship that has already been restored. This shift changes the motivation behind many spiritual practices. Prayer, for example, is no longer an attempt to persuade a distant God to listen. It becomes a conversation within an already established relationship. Worship is no longer a moment when believers attempt to bring God's presence down from heaven. It becomes a joyful response to the presence of God that is already among His people. Faith itself begins to feel less like an exhausting effort to maintain belief and more like a growing awareness of a reality that has already begun. This is one of the reasons the New Testament often describes the Christian life using the language of rest. In the letter to the Hebrews, believers are invited to enter into God’s rest. This does not mean inactivity or indifference. Rather, it means freedom from the constant anxiety of trying to earn what has already been given. Rest is the natural response to completed work. When Jesus said “It is finished,” He was announcing that the essential work of reconciliation between God and humanity had been accomplished. From that point forward, the invitation of the Gospel becomes an invitation to trust that work. This is where the idea of grace becomes central. Grace means that the relationship between God and humanity is not based on human achievement. It is based on God's initiative. God’s love for humanity did not begin when people started behaving correctly. It began long before anyone had the ability to respond. The Apostle John expresses this beautifully when he writes: &quot;We love because He first loved us.&quot; Grace shifts the foundation of the spiritual life away from performance and toward relationship. For many believers, discovering this truth can be deeply freeing. Instead of constantly wondering whether they have done enough to be accepted by God, they begin to realize that acceptance was the starting point of the relationship, not the reward for achieving it. This does not lead to spiritual laziness, as some might fear. Instead, it often produces the opposite effect. When people begin to understand that they are loved and accepted, their motivation changes. Obedience becomes an expression of love rather than a desperate attempt to earn approval. Joy begins to replace fear. Freedom begins to replace anxiety. The Christian life starts to feel less like a burden and more like a journey of discovery. This is where many mystics throughout history began to speak about the experience of grace in more expressive language. When the realization of God's acceptance moved from an intellectual concept into lived experience, it often produced overwhelming gratitude and joy. Some described it as a deep peace. Others described it as a sense of being embraced by divine love. Still others spoke about joy that felt almost intoxicating. While the language may vary, the underlying experience is similar. When the heart begins to trust that the work of reconciliation has already been accomplished, the pressure to earn God's love begins to fade. The soul begins to relax. Faith becomes less about climbing toward</p>
<p>God and more about discovering that God has already come near. This is what many teachers mean when they speak about living from the finished work of Christ. It means trusting that what Jesus accomplished through His life, death, and resurrection truly changed the relationship between God and humanity. It means allowing that truth to reshape how we pray, worship, and understand ourselves. It means discovering that the Christian life is not primarily about striving to reach God. It is about learning to live in the grace that God has already given.</p>
<hr/>
<p class="reflection-heading">Reflection &amp; Contemplation</p>
<p class="scripture">Take a few minutes to sit quietly and reflect on the words spoken by Jesus on the cross: “It is finished.” — John 19:30 Consider the following questions: What do these words suggest about the completeness of Christ’s work? Have you ever felt pressure to earn God’s acceptance? How might your spiritual life change if you truly believed the work of reconciliation has already been completed? Sit quietly for a few moments and allow yourself to rest in the idea that the foundation of your relationship with God is not your effort. It is His grace.</p>
</body></html>