<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head><title>Chapter 14: Sacred Reading: Encountering Scripture</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/></head>
<body>
<p class="chapter-number">CHAPTER 14</p>
<p class="chapter-title">Sacred Reading: Encountering Scripture</p>
<p class="no-indent">Sacred Reading: Encountering Scripture with the Heart For many believers, reading the Bible becomes a familiar routine. People open their Bibles, read a chapter or two, and then continue with the rest of their day. While this practice can be helpful, it sometimes becomes rushed or purely intellectual. The words are read, but they do not always have time to settle deeply into the heart. Early Christians and monastic communities recognized this challenge long ago. They understood that scripture was not meant only to inform the mind. It was meant to shape the heart and deepen the believer’s awareness of God. Because of this, they developed a slow and reflective approach to reading scripture known as Lectio Divina, a Latin phrase that means “sacred reading.” Lectio Divina is not a complicated technique. In fact, its beauty lies in its simplicity. It invites the reader to slow down and allow a short passage of scripture to unfold gradually through reflection and prayer. Instead of reading large sections quickly, the reader focuses on a small portion of scripture and gives it time to speak. This practice has traditionally been described in four simple movements. 1. Reading (Lectio) The first step is simply to read a short passage of scripture slowly. Rather than rushing through the text, the reader pays attention to individual words and phrases. The goal is not to analyze the passage immediately, but to notice what stands out. Sometimes a particular phrase may seem especially meaningful. Other times a single word may draw the reader’s attention. These moments of attention are often where reflection begins. 2. Reflection (Meditatio) After reading the passage once or twice, the reader begins to reflect on what has been noticed. Questions may arise such as: What is this passage revealing about God? What might this word or phrase mean in my life right now? Why does this part of the text stand out to me? Reflection in Lectio Divina is gentle and open rather than analytical. The reader allows the meaning of the passage to unfold gradually instead of forcing a quick interpretation. Often the same phrase may be repeated quietly in the mind, allowing its meaning to sink deeper. 3. Prayer (Oratio) As reflection continues, the reader begins to respond to God in prayer. This prayer may be very simple. It might involve gratitude, asking for guidance, or expressing a desire to live more faithfully. The prayer is not meant to be formal or elaborate. It is simply a response to what the reader senses God revealing through the scripture. In this moment, the text moves from being something that is read to something that becomes part of a conversation with God. 4. Rest (Contemplatio) The final movement of Lectio Divina is quiet rest. After reading, reflecting, and praying, the reader simply sits in silence for a few moments. There are no words that must be spoken and no ideas that must be analyzed. The purpose of this moment is to rest in the presence of God. For many people, this is the most meaningful part of the practice. The scripture passage becomes like a doorway into deeper awareness of God's presence. Instead of constantly thinking about the text, the reader simply rests in the truth it has revealed. Why This Practice Matters Lectio Divina helps believers experience scripture as more than information. The Bible becomes a living conversation rather than simply a collection of teachings. Many people discover that this slower form of reading allows scripture to shape their thoughts and</p>
<p class="scripture">emotions in new ways. Verses that once seemed familiar may suddenly feel deeply personal. Passages that were previously overlooked may reveal new insight. The practice also helps believers develop patience and attentiveness. In a world where information is often consumed quickly, Lectio Divina invites readers to slow down and listen carefully. This posture of listening reflects the relational nature of the spiritual life. Instead of treating scripture as a book to master, the reader approaches it as a place to encounter God. Over time, this practice often deepens a person's awareness of God's presence throughout daily life. Scripture becomes something that continues to echo in the mind and heart long after the reading has ended. A single phrase may return during moments of difficulty or guide a decision during the day. In this way, sacred reading becomes a source of quiet guidance and encouragement. A Simple Example Here is a brief example of how someone might practice Lectio Divina using a short verse. “Be still and know that I am God.” — Psalm 46:10 First, the verse is read slowly several times. Then attention may rest on the phrase “Be still.” The reader reflects on what stillness means in their own life. A short prayer may follow: “Lord, help me learn to rest in Your presence.” Finally, the reader sits quietly for a few moments, simply resting in the awareness that God is near. Scripture as Living Word For many Christians throughout history, Lectio Divina became a daily practice. Monks and contemplative communities often spent hours each day slowly reading and meditating on scripture in this way. But the practice is not limited to monastic life. Even a few minutes each day can open space for deeper awareness of God's presence. Sacred reading reminds us that the Bible is not only a source of instruction. It is also a place of encounter. Through its words, believers are invited to discover the character of God, the story of Christ, and the invitation to live in relationship with Him.</p>
<hr/>
<p class="reflection-heading">Reflection &amp; Practice</p>
<p class="scripture">Try a brief moment of sacred reading now. Read this verse slowly: “Christ in you, the hope of glory.” — Colossians 1:27 Read it once. Read it again slowly. Notice if a particular word or phrase stands out. Reflect on its meaning for a few moments. Then sit quietly and rest in the idea that Christ's presence is already near. Even a few minutes of sacred reading can open the heart to deeper awareness.</p>
</body></html>