<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<!DOCTYPE html>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head><title>Glossary</title><link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="style.css"/></head>
<body>
<h2>Glossary of Mystical / Contemplative Terms</h2>
<p class="glossary-term">Contemplation</p>
<p class="glossary-def">A quiet form of prayer that focuses on resting in awareness of God's presence rather than speaking many words.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Grace</p>
<p class="glossary-def">The unearned love and favor of God given freely to humanity through Christ.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Union with God</p>
<p class="glossary-def">The theological concept that believers live in relationship with God through Christ and the indwelling of the Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Perichoresis</p>
<p class="glossary-def">A theological term describing the mutual indwelling and relationship between the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Lectio Divina</p>
<p class="glossary-def">An ancient practice of sacred reading where scripture is slowly read, reflected upon, prayed over, and contemplated.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Spiritual Formation</p>
<p class="glossary-def">The lifelong process through which a person's character and life are shaped by relationship with God.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Contemplative Prayer</p>
<p class="glossary-def">A form of prayer that emphasizes silence, stillness, and attentiveness to God's presence.</p>
<p class="glossary-term">Grace-Centered Living</p>
<p class="glossary-def">A spiritual posture that focuses on trusting God's love rather than striving to earn approval.</p>
</body></html>